Add information for upgrading from OIDC to Structured Authentication config (#12316)
gardener/gardener: docs/usage/shoot/shoot_access.md

Be aware that changing the configuration in the `ConfigMap` will be applied in the next `Shoot` reconciliation, but this is not automatically triggered.
If you want the changes to roll out immediately, [trigger a reconciliation explicitly](../shoot-operations/shoot_operations.md#immediate-reconciliation).

> ### Upgrading from `OpenIDConnect` to Structured Authentication Config

Reviewer: OpenIDConnect can be confused with [the CRD that OWA operates](https://github.com/gardener/oidc-webhook-authenticator/blob/7f88563f79448c7d8ca70944b36487746b301b45/charts/oidc-webhook-authenticator/charts/application/templates/authentication.gardener.cloud_openidconnects.yaml#L14).
```suggestion
### Upgrading from OIDC to Structured Authentication Config
```

Reviewer 2: I guess the same comment applies to all other occurrences of "`OpenIDConnect`".

> ### Upgrading from `OpenIDConnect` to Structured Authentication Config

Reviewer 2: Can we also link this section from https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/7f7061097233b999006d69c010b6295146a20789/docs/usage/shoot/shoot_kubernetes_versions.md#L15-L17?

So that readers of the above guide have a reference to this section - the exact steps to follow for the migration.

> ### Upgrading from `OpenIDConnect` to Structured Authentication Config

Reviewer 2: I think these docs make sense in to context of upgrade to Kubernetes 1.32 as a Shoot with Kubernetes 1.32+ does not allow the `spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.oidcConfig` to be set, right?

If that's the case, could you please clarify this and describe when the migration has to occur? Does it need to occur with the same update request that updates the Kubernetes version to 1.32 or does it have to occur beforehand? Which of the 2 approaches do we recommend?

cc @AleksandarSavchev for input

Reviewer 3: > as a Shoot with Kubernetes 1.32+ does not allow the spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.oidcConfig to be set, right?

Correct

> Does it need to occur with the same update request that updates the Kubernetes version to 1.32 or does it have to occur beforehand? Which of the 2 approaches do we recommend?

We recommend users migrate to Structured authentication before they upgrade to v1.32 to avoid not being able to revert the change. Ideally users should firstly do the migration on a development `Shoot` cluster and check if it is running as expected.

Reviewer 2: Okay, let's add as note to the docs that it is recommended first to migrate from OIDC to StructuredAuthentication before you upgrade to K8s 1.32.

> ### Upgrading from `OpenIDConnect` to Structured Authentication Config

Reviewer 2: I would rather call it migrate, not upgrade. IMO, you upgrade versions but migrate from one field to another field.

```suggestion
### Migrating from `OpenIDConnect` to Structured Authentication Config
```

> If you would like to migrate from `OpenIDConnect` to Structured Authentication Config and your `shoot.yaml` has `spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.oidcConfig` set, for example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you would like to migrate from `OpenIDConnect` to Structured Authentication Config and your `Shoot` spec has the `spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.oidcConfig` field set, for example:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: Shoot
spec:
  kubernetes:
    kubeAPIServer:
      oidcConfig:
        clientID: <client-ID>
        groupsClaim: groups
        issuerURL: <issuer-url>

>         usernameClaim: username

Reviewer: I would suggest that we include a prefix at least for one of `usernameClaim` or `groupsClaim` so we have both options displayed to users.

```

1. Create a `ConfigMap` in your project namespaces containing an equivalent `AuthenticationConfiguration` to your current `oidcConfig`. It should look similar to:

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    metadata:
      name: structured-authentication-config
    data:
      config.yaml: |
        apiVersion: apiserver.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
        kind: AuthenticationConfiguration
        jwt:
        - issuer:
            url: <issuer-url>
            audiences:
            - <client-ID>
          claimMappings:
            groups:
              claim: groups
              prefix: ""
            username:
              claim: username
              prefix: ""
    ```

    You can also follow the steps in the [Kubernetes 1.30: Structured Authentication Configuration Moves to Beta](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2024/04/25/structured-authentication-moves-to-beta/#migration-from-command-line-arguments-to-configuration-file) blog post.

> 1. Remove the `spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.oidcConfig` section from the `shoot.yaml` file and replace it a reference to the newly created `ConfigMap` in `spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.structuredAuthentication.configMapName`:

Reviewer 2: "`shoot.yaml` file" is an incorrect assumption. End users can issue requests against the Gardener API server in many ways - gardener dashboard, kubectl, their own machinery using SDK (client-go, etc.). I would suggest to use a general term like "Shoot spec" instead.

```suggestion
1. Remove the `spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.oidcConfig` field from the Shoot spec and replace it with a reference to the newly created `ConfigMap` in `spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.structuredAuthentication.configMapName`:
```

Be aware that changing the configuration in the `ConfigMap` will be applied in the next `Shoot` reconciliation, but this is not automatically triggered.
If you want the changes to roll out immediately, [trigger a reconciliation explicitly](../shoot-operations/shoot_operations.md#immediate-reconciliation).

### Migrating from OIDC to Structured Authentication Config

> If you would like to migrate from OIDC to Structured Authentication Config and your `Shoot` spec has the `spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.oidcConfig` field set, for example:

Reviewer 2: Could you please elaborate on the case if the end user uses [ClusterOpenIDConnectPreset](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/v1.121.0/docs/usage/security/openidconnect-presets.md#clusteropenidconnectpreset) or [OpenIDConnectPreset](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/v1.121.0/docs/usage/security/openidconnect-presets.md#openidconnectpreset)? What they have to do to migrate in that case?

@AleksandarSavchev @dimityrmirchev what will be the destiny of the {Cluster}OpenIDConnectPreset feature after StructureAuthentication feature? Should we deprecate and remove this API?

Reviewer 3: [ClusterOpenIDConnectPreset](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/v1.121.0/docs/usage/security/openidconnect-presets.md#clusteropenidconnectpreset) and [OpenIDConnectPreset](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/v1.121.0/docs/usage/security/openidconnect-presets.md#openidconnectpreset) only work in the context of `oidcConfig`. With the removal of `spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.oidcConfig` these resources will be removed as well.

Using StructureAuthentication would not required such CRDs since the `ConfigMap` containing the `AuthenticationConfiguration` can be referenced by multiple `Shoots`.

Reviewer 2: > [ClusterOpenIDConnectPreset](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/v1.121.0/docs/usage/security/openidconnect-presets.md#clusteropenidconnectpreset) and [OpenIDConnectPreset](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/v1.121.0/docs/usage/security/openidconnect-presets.md#openidconnectpreset) only work in the context of `oidcConfig`. With the removal of `spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.oidcConfig` these resources will be removed as well.

Are they deprecated? Is there an API warning when you interact with these resources that could indicate the end user that this API is deprecated? Is there an issue to track the deprecation and removal of this API?

> Using StructureAuthentication would not required such CRDs since the ConfigMap containing the AuthenticationConfiguration can be referenced by multiple Shoots.

Sure, that's clear.

In the context of this PR I would expect to see:
- instructions/notes: how to migrate from `{Cluster}OpenIDConnectPreset`. What is the source of truth the `{Cluster}OpenIDConnectPreset` or the Shoot spec? IIRC, `{Cluster}OpenIDConnectPreset` was only doing mutations on Shoot creation, right?
- instructions/notes to delete obsolete `{Cluster}OpenIDConnectPreset` after the migration to StructuredAuthentication
- anything else?

Reviewer 3: > Are they deprecated? Is there an API warning when you interact with these resources that could indicate the end user that this API is deprecated? Is there an issue to track the deprecation and removal of this API?

oidcConfig + {Cluster}OpenIDConnectPreset were deprecated with https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/10666

```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: Shoot
spec:
  kubernetes:
    kubeAPIServer:
      oidcConfig:
        clientID: <client-ID>
        groupsClaim: groups
        groupsPrefix: "<groups-prefix>"
        issuerURL: <issuer-url>
        usernameClaim: username
```

> 1. Create a `ConfigMap` in your project namespaces containing an equivalent `AuthenticationConfiguration` to your current `oidcConfig`. It should look similar to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create a `ConfigMap` in your project namespace containing an equivalent `AuthenticationConfiguration` to your current OIDC config. It should look similar to:
```

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    metadata:

>       name: structured-authentication-config

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we add a namespace field in the ConfigMap?

## OpenID Connect

> [!WARNING]

> > OpenID Connect is deprecated in favor of [Structured Authentication configuration](#structured-authentication). Setting OpenID Connect configurations is forbidden for clusters with Kubernetes version `>= 1.32`. The configuration and the related CRDs `(Cluster)OpenIDConnectPreset` will be removed when the oldest supported version of Kubernetes is `v1.32` in Gardener.

Reviewer 2: `(Cluster)OpenIDConnectPreset` are not CRDs, they are API resources from an aggregated API server (gardener-apiserver). See comparison between CRDs and aggregated API servers - https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/.

```suggestion
> OpenID Connect is deprecated in favor of [Structured Authentication configuration](#structured-authentication). Setting OpenID Connect configurations is forbidden for clusters with Kubernetes version `>= 1.32`. The configuration and the related API resources `(Cluster)OpenIDConnectPreset` will be removed when Gardener no longer supports clusters with Kubernetes version `< 1.32`.
```

Reviewer 2: I addressed with https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/12316/commits/26edda7ee0c9109683aa4f6e65fed57335616b12.
